# Testing UI5 Web Components

*Note:* All examples in this tutorial are taken from the Demo UI5 Web Component (`ui5-demo`), generated by the package initialization script. 
For more information on creating a new package with a demo web component inside, click [here](Creating%20UI5%20Web%20Components%20Packages.md).

## 1. Preface

The test framework of choice for UI5 Web Components is [WebdriverIO](https://webdriver.io/) or `WDIO` for short.
It has an easy to use API - [https://webdriver.io/docs/api.html](https://webdriver.io/docs/api.html), and has excellent support for Web Components.

The browser of choice for test execution is [Google Chrome](https://www.google.com/chrome/), respectively the used Web Driver is [ChromeDriver](https://chromedriver.chromium.org/)  

## Managing `ChromeDriver`

`ChromeDriver` is a peer dependency of `@ui5/webcomponents-tools`. Therefore, you are expected to install and upgrade it manually.

You can install it with `npm`:
 - `npm i --save-dev chromedriver`

or with `yarn`:
 - `yarn add -D chromedriver` 

`Google Chrome` and `ChromeDriver` need to be the same version to work together. Whenever you update `Google Chrome` on
your system (or it updates automatically, if allowed), you are expected to also update `chromedriver` to the respective version.

## 2. Running the tests

## 2.1 Test configuration 

The configuration for `WDIO` can be found in the `config/` directory under `wdio.conf.js`.

As explained [here](Creating%20UI5%20Web%20Components%20Packages.md) in the section about the `config/` directory, you can 
customize, or even completely replace the default configuration.

However, before doing so, please note the following two benefits of working with the default configuration, provided by UI5 Web Components:
 - Hooks, synchronizing the execution of all relevant `WDIO` commands (f.e. `click`, `url`, `$`, `$$`) with the rendering of the framework to 
 ensure consistency when reading or changing the state of the components.
 - Additional API methods: `setProperty`, `setAttribute`, `removeAttribute`, `hasClass`. 

So our recommendation would be to modify it, if necessary, but not completely replace it.

## 2.2 Running all tests

`npm run test`
or
`yarn test`

This will *launch a static server* and execute all tests found in the `test/specs/` directory of your package.

*Note:* Before running the tests for the first time, make sure you've built the project, or at least the dev server is running (`build` or `start` commands).

## 2.3 Running a single test spec

`npm run test test/specs/Demo.spec.js`
or
`yarn test test/specs/Demo.spec.js`

*Note:* Executing a single test spec only makes sense for debugging purposes, therefore no test server is launched for it.
Make sure you're running the `start` command while running single test specs, as it provides a server and the ability to change
files, and test the changes on the fly.

## 3. Writing tests

The simplest test would look something like this:

```js
describe("ui5-demo rendering", () => {
	browser.url("http://localhost:8080/test-resources/pages/index.html");

	it("tests if web component is correctly rendered", () => {
		const innerContent = browser.$("#myFirstComponent").shadow$("div");
		assert.ok(innerContent, "content rendered");
	});
});
``` 

Key points:
   - Load the test page with the `browser.url` command. You can do this once for each test suite or for each individual test.
   - You can access the web components with `$` or `$$`.
   - You can access the shadow roots with `shadow$` or `shadow$$`.
   - Simulate mouse interaction with the web components by calling the `click` command on the web component itself or certain parts of its shadow root.
   - Simulate keyboard with the `keys` command.
   - You can read the DOM with commands such as `HTML`, `value`, `getProperty`, `getAttribute`, etc...
   - You can modify the DOM with commands such as `setProperty`, `setAttribute` etc...

For `WDIO` capabilities, see:
   - Official API: [https://webdriver.io/docs/api.html](https://webdriver.io/docs/api.html)
   - Additional commands, provided in our standard `WDIO` configuration: `setProperty`, `setAttribute`, `removeAttribute`, `hasClass`    

*Note:* The standard `WDIO` configuration we provide automatically synchronizes all test commands' execution with the framework's rendering cycle.
Therefore, in the example above, the `shadow$` command will internally wait for all rendering to be over before being executed. The
same holds true for commands that modify the dom such as `setAttribute` or `click`.

## 4. Debugging tests

Debugging with `WDIO` is really simple. Just follow these 3 steps:

1. Change the `WDIO` configuration file `config/wdio.conf.js` to disable `headless` mode for `Google Chrome` as follows:

	From:
	
	```js
	module.exports = require("@ui5/webcomponents-tools/components-package/wdio.js");
	```
	
	to:

	```js
    const result = require("@ui5/webcomponents-tools/components-package/wdio.js");
    result.config.capabilities[0]["goog:chromeOptions"].args = ['--disable-gpu']; // From: ['--disable-gpu', '--headless']
    module.exports = result;
    ```
    
    If you happen to debug often, it's recommended to keep the file in this format and just comment out the middle line when you're done debugging.

2. Set a breakpoint with `browser.debug` somewhere in your test:

	```js
	it("tests if web component is correctly rendered", () => {
        const innerContent = browser.$("#myFirstComponent").shadow$("div");
        browser.debug();
        assert.ok(innerContent, "content rendered");
    });
	```
	
	For more on `debug`, see; [https://webdriver.io/docs/api/browser/debug.html](https://webdriver.io/docs/api/browser/debug.html)

3. Run the single test spec and wait for the browser to open and pause on your breakpoint:

 - Run the dev server, if you haven't already:
	
	`yarn start` 
	
	or 
	
	`npm run start`.

 - Run the single test spec:
	
	`yarn test test/specs/Demo.spec.js` 
	
	or 
	
	`npm run test test/specs/Demo.spec.js`.
	  
`Google Chrome` will then open in a new window, controlled by `WDIO` via the `Chrome Driver`, and your test will pause on your 
breakpoint of choice. Proceed to debug normally.	 
