# UI5 Web Components i18n for apps (valid since 1.0.0-rc.8)

*Note:* For information on how to setup `i18n` for your custom components, please see [Developing Web Components](./dev/Developing%20Web%20Components.md).

The `@ui5/webcomponents-base` package allows the usage of `i18n` functionality not just for third-party UI5 components,
but for apps as well.

## Step by step tutorial

This tutorial will demonstrate how you can use the UI5 Web Components `i18n` functionality for the purpose of your apps.

1. Start by creating some `i18n` resources in a directory that can be served, for example:

	 File    |  Content
	------------ | ---------------------------
	 `assets/messagebundle_de.properties`  | `PLEASE_WAIT=Bitte warten`
	 `assets/messagebundle_fr.properties`  | `PLEASE_WAIT=Patientez.`
	 `assets/messagebundle_es.properties`  | `PLEASE_WAIT=Espere`
	 `assets/messagebundle_en.properties`  | `PLEASE_WAIT=Please wait`


2. Import the following `i18n`-related modules to your app:
	
	```js
	import "@ui5/webcomponents-base/dist/features/PropertiesFormatSupport.js";
	import { registerI18nBundle, fetchI18nBundle, getI18nBundle } from "@ui5/webcomponents-base/dist/i18nBundle.js";
	```

	The first one provides support for `.properties` files, as used in the example and the second one - the functions
	that will allow you to take advantage of the `i18n` functionality.

3. Register your message bundles:

	```js
	registerI18nBundle("myApp", {
        de: "./assets/messagebundle_de.properties",
        es: "./assets/messagebundle_es.properties",
        fr: "./assets/messagebundle_fr.properties",
        en: "./assets/messagebundle_en.properties",
    });
	```
	
	The first argument is an ID that will be used to reference this message bundle and the second, an object,
	providing the URLs where the `i18n` assets can be found.
	
	*Note:* This is just asset registration, no data will be fetched at that point.
	
4. Fetch the texts for the current language:

	```js
	await fetchI18nBundle("myApp");
	```
	
	This will fetch the appropriate texts for the currently configured language.
	
5. Get and use the bundle

	```js
	const bundle = getI18nBundle("myApp");
	const pleaseWait = bundle.getText({key: "PLEASE_WAIT", defaultText: "Please wait (some fallback text)"});
	console.log("Please wait in the current language is: ", pleaseWait);
	```
	
	The `getText` method expects an object as the first argument, with 2 properties:
	 - `key` - the key for the required text (must match a key in the assets file)
	 - `defaultText` - fallback text that will be used if you did not register a bundle for the default language (`en`).
	This property is optional.
	
	Alternatively, the first parameter of `getText` can be the key only:
	
	`bundle.getText("PLEASE WAIT")`.
	
	You can pass multiple additional values to `getText` for texts with placeholders, for example:
	
	If your text looks like this:
	
	`CAROUSEL_DOT_TEXT=Item {0} of {1} displayed`
	
	you can call `getText` like this:
	
	`bundle.getText({key: "CAROUSEL_DOT_TEXT"}, 5, 20);`
	
	which will finally result in, for example:
	
	`Item 5 of 20 displayed`. 

6. Test your page using different languages, f.e. set `?sap-ui-language=de` in the URL or change the configuration.	
		
## Summary

The whole code would look like this:

```js
import "@ui5/webcomponents-base/dist/features/PropertiesFormatSupport.js";
import { registerI18nBundle, fetchI18nBundle, getI18nBundle } from "@ui5/webcomponents-base/dist/i18nBundle.js";

registerI18nBundle("myApp", {
	de: "./assets/messagebundle_de.properties",
	es: "./assets/messagebundle_es.properties",
	fr: "./assets/messagebundle_fr.properties",
	en: "./assets/messagebundle_en.properties",
});

await fetchI18nBundle("myApp");

const bundle = getI18nBundle("myApp");

const pleaseWait = bundle.getText({key: "PLEASE_WAIT", defaultText: "Please wait (fallback)"});
console.log("Please wait in the current language is: ", pleaseWait);
```		

You register your assets for all supported languages, then you fetch the data for the currently active language,
get a reference to the bundle and call the `getText` method to get texts for your app.

## Tips and tricks

 - You can skip the `.properties` format support import

 ```js
 import "@ui5/webcomponents-base/dist/features/PropertiesFormatSupport.js";
 ```
 and provide the data directly in `.json` format, if you want to load a little bit less code in the runtime.
 
 
File    |  Content
------------ | ---------------------------
`assets/messagebundle_de.properties`  | `{PLEASE_WAIT: "Bitte warten"}`
`assets/messagebundle_fr.properties`  | `{PLEASE_WAIT: "Patientez."}`
`assets/messagebundle_es.properties`  | `{PLEASE_WAIT: "Espere"}`
`assets/messagebundle_en.properties`  | `{PLEASE_WAIT: "Please wait"}`
 	

 - If you don't register a bundle for the default language (`en`), the fallback text (`defaultText`) for `getText` will be used instead.
   This way you can skip fetching the text bundle for the default language altogether, provided you pass the `defaultText`
   each time you call `getText`.
